criticism_theories = '''1. Structuralist Criticism
Structure is a whole consisting of relations between elements and elements, and
these relations have invariant properties through a series of transformative
processes. In the analysis of paintings, it attempts to elucidate the cultural and
social meanings behind the symbols and signs in the painting by analysing them, or
it considers the painting as a kind of ’visual language’ and analyses its ’grammar’.It includes special mention of the colour
used and where they were used.
It also attempts to interpret meanings and messages by capturing the dichotomies
(good and evil, male and female, civilised and barbaric) within the work.
2. Narrative Criticism
Stories are everywhere. When a chain of events creates a flow, a story is born. In
this sense we are living a story of some kind. The central interest of a story is not
whether something succeeds or fails, but how we can deal with events that
suddenly fall upon us. This is the point of view from which we read the work in
time.
3. Reception Theory Criticism
Reception theory denies the autonomy of a work of art and emphasises the
reactions and interpretations of those who receive it. The meaning of a work of art
depends on the knowledge, experience, values and context of the viewer, and is
assumed to be diverse and changing over time.
4. Deconstruction Criticism
The basis of deconstruction is to break with the notion held by structuralism that
there is a ’centre’ and that ’structurality’ is preserved. It argues that it is deceptive
for people who cannot go outside of culture to draw lines such as the dichotomy
between ’nature’ and ’culture’. Specifically, it deconstructs the central
interpretation of the work and explores the contradictions within and around the
work.
5. Psychoanalytic Criticism
Focuses on the latent (unconscious) content of a work of art, which does not appear
on the surface, but is a repository of the desires and conflicts that people repress.
By questioning the surface meaning of a work of art and focusing on the detailed
expression of the work, which may contradict the subject of the work, it is possible
to trace back to the deeper (unconscious) meaning of the work. Focus on the
symbolism in the work, the psychological analysis of the characters and the
unconscious of the author.
6. Thematic Criticism
Through creation, the artist explores life, expresses the depths of consciousness
and discovers unknown dimensions. He also discerns thematic continuity in the
artist’s experiences suggested by the work. Criticism is the unravelling of the
secrets of such creative acts and becoming one with the existence and
consciousness of the artist. Specifically, after identifying the theme or motif of a
work, it examines how the symbols in the work emphasise the theme or the cultural
and historical background of the theme.
7. Feminist Criticism
Analyses and evaluates works of art from a female perspective to identify women’s
roles, structures of gender inequality and sexism, and power structures. Explores
how women are portrayed, the roles they are given, or their subjective expression
against the male gaze.
8. Gender Criticism
Identifies how gender is constructed and functions within culture and society.
Emphasises that gender is not fixed through gender fluidity, sexual identity and
critiques of heteronormativity. Michel Foucault, who laid the foundations of gender
theory, discussed modern power as a mechanism through which people, by
identifying with their sexuality, subjectively follow and realise the ’normal’ ways
of being directed by the state and medicine.
9. Genetic Criticism
At the heart of the theory of generation is the concept that a work of art is the
product of a process of production. The work is conceived by the author, from its
main components down to the smallest detail, and continues to be generated and
transformed through various developments and modifications. Furthermore, it is
often the case that the work is completed at a certain point in time but continues to
be produced as an extension of that point in time. A generative interpretation
considers the process of production of a work, as well as the many works that must
have emerged in the process of production.
10. Marxist Criticism
Criticism from a Marxist perspective sees the artist not as a privileged subject, but
as an entity that strongly reflects the system and ideology of the society in which
he or she lives. While recognising the relative autonomy of artistic works, they are
also seen as being decisively influenced by the historical and social conditions of
their time.
11. Cultural Materialist Criticism/New Historicist Criticism
Both Cultural Materialism and New Historicist do not discuss culture in isolation,
but in relation to history and politics. Cultural materialism, based on Marxism,
attempts to view culture as the lived experience of people living in a society at a
given time, with its complex processes of change and conflict. New historicism
aims to clarify how culture relates to historical power structures and to dismantle
fixed views of history.
12. Sociocriticism
Sociocritical criticism explores how society, history and ideology are interwoven
within a work of art. It questions the reproduction of the social meaning of the
work and the relationship between the work and the world.
13. Cultural Studies
Cultural Studies sees everyday life as a site of domination, resistance and
negotiation by social forces, and sees culture as a representational node of these
power relations. In other words, culture is the historical production of multiple
powers in conflict and negotiation in all everyday social practices.
14. Systems Theory Criticism
Luhmann’s systems theory considers art as an independent social system and
analyses its functions and social roles. It emphasises that works of art demonstrate
the various interpretability of reality and provide unique communication through
perception. By considering its interaction with other social systems, the social
significance of art is more deeply understood.
15. Postcolonial criticism/Transnationalism
Postcolonial criticism elucidates the profound cultural and social effects of
colonialism and re-evaluates history and culture from the perspective of the
subjugated and anti-imperialism. Criticism based on transnationalism, on the other
hand, takes into account not only the country or region where the work originated,
but also other cultures and international contexts that have influenced it.'''